Zoning management of urban informal vendor spaces using mobile
signaling and machine learning: The case of Wuhan
Heng Zhou a,b,c
, Kui Yang d,* , Jingnan Huang e,f
, Jun Huang g
, Yixuan Gao e
, Jinting Zhang d
,
Yong Chen b
, Mengya Yu h
a School of Urban Construction, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430081, China b School of Resources and Environmental Engineering, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430081, China c Hubei Engineering Research Center of Urban Renewal, Wuhan 430081, China d School of Resource and Environmental Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China e School of Urban Design, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China f Hubei Habitat Environment Research Centre of Engineering and Technology, Wuhan 430079, China g College of Digital Construction and Blasting Engineering, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China h Wuhan Planning & Design Institute, Wuhan 430023, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Urban informal economy
Vendor space
Mobile signaling
Time-space-population screening method
Machine learning
Sensitivity zoning
ABSTRACT
The vendor economy is an important component of the urban informal economy and serves as a valuable
"lubricant" to enhance social inclusivity and stimulate socio-economic activity. However, urban vendor spaces
have several negative effects, such as encroaching on public spaces, affecting the city’s image, causing traffic
congestion, contributing to environmental pollution, and triggering safety issues. Studying the distribution
characteristics and formation mechanisms of urban vendor spaces can provide support for the formulation of
governance policies related to these areas. Existing research is often limited by data and methods, predominantly
relying on case studies, with a lack of comprehensive urban-level investigations. This limitation increases the
likelihood of failure in spatial governance policies. This paper utilizes mobile signaling data and constructs a
time-space-population screening method to identify vendor spaces across the entire urban area. It employs
XGBoost and SHAP to analyze the influencing mechanisms of vendor spaces, and ultimately conducts a clustering
analysis based on the SHAP values of various factors to identify sensitivity zones for vendor spaces, thereby
proposing site selection and governance recommendations for vendors. The study finds that: (1) In the main
urban area of Wuhan, informal street vendor spaces have formed two primary aggregation zones and four secondary aggregation zones, primarily linked to large communities, schools, sports centers, commercial districts,
and hospitals. (2) Among the factors affecting vendor aggregation, consumer demand-related elements have the
highest average importance, followed by facility density-related elements, and lastly traffic environment-related
elements. (3) In high-attraction areas for informal street vendor spaces, the mean RFD (Recreational facilities
density) is the highest, while areas along rivers and lakes generally do not attract vendors easily. (4) We have
identified some previously unrecognized distributions of vendors, such as the transitional zones in Hongshan
District and Jiangxia District, which represent potential development areas for vendor space management. These
research findings provide valuable references for vendor space governance in large cities.
1. Introduction
1.1. Research background
The informal economy refers to economic activities that are not
included in official statistical systems and lack formal regulation and
institutional protection. This economic model is particularly prominent
in urban environments, as it provides livelihood opportunities for
marginalized groups while also reflecting inequalities in urban development. As Roy (2005) points out in his paper, urban informality is not
only a manifestation of economic practices but also a product of social
space, highlighting the complex relationship between urban planning
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: yangkui@whu.edu.cn (K. Yang).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Sustainable Cities and Society
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scs
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2025.106858
Received 29 May 2025; Received in revised form 23 September 2025; Accepted 24 September 2025
Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
Available online 25 September 2025
2210-6707/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
and social dynamics. In this context, the vendor economy, as a typical
form of informal economy (Recchi, 2020), provides employment opportunities for low-income and unemployed populations in cities
(Lemessa et al., 2021) and offers diverse consumption choices for citizens (Maneepong & Walsh, 2013; Flock & Breitung, 2015). It serves as a
valuable "lubricant" for enhancing social inclusivity and revitalizing the
socio-economic landscape (Onodugo et al., 2016). According to the
"2023–2027 Research Report and Investment Outlook on China’s
Informal street vendor Economy" by Zhiyan Advisory Industry Research
Institute, the market size of the vendor economy in China grew from
22.59 trillion yuan in 2018 to 31.48 trillion yuan in 2022, highlighting
its significant economic value.
However, the clustering of spaces created by the vendor economy is a
topic of much debate (Huang et al., 2019; Kamete, 2018). To maintain
their businesses, vendors often congregate in prime urban locations,
such as city squares, along streets, at entrances and exits of transportation hubs, road intersections, and shopping center entrances
(Lindell, 2019; Bandauko & Arku, 2024). In these locations, vendors
create numerous informal spaces that are often characterized by blurred
boundaries, diverse forms, and varying scales.
These vendor spaces inevitably encroach upon public urban spaces,
impacting the urban landscape, causing traffic congestion, contributing
to environmental pollution, and provoking safety concerns (Ojeda &
Pino, 2019). In response to these issues, some cities have implemented
compulsory removal measures for vendor spaces (Thomas Devlin, 2018;
Boonjubun, 2017), which have proven to be inhumane and challenging
to execute successfully (Huang et al., 2019; Linares, 2018;
Pel´
aez-Higuera et al., 2023). Urban vendor spaces are an organic
component of public urban spaces and a significant subject of urban
spatial governance. Therefore, identifying the locations of vendor spaces
and systematically studying their layout characteristics and
site-selection factors can aid in developing targeted spatial regulatory
strategies. This can help guide the development of vendor spaces in a
non-disruptive manner, thereby enhancing the management of urban
public spaces.
1.2. Literature review
In recent years, research (Anaafo et al., 2024; Choueiri et al., 2025;
Elshater & Abusaada, 2024; Martinez & Rivera-Acevedo, 2018) on
vendor spaces has primarily focused on four aspects: the identification of
vendor spaces, the site-selection logic of vendor spaces, the characteristics of vendor spaces, and governance policies related to vendor spaces.
There are mainly three methods for identifying vendor spaces. First,
many scholars have used interviews (Huang et al., 2019; Sun et al.,
2022; Flock & Breitung, 2015; Thanh & Duong, 2022; Maneepong &
Walsh, 2013) and questionnaires (Martínez et al., 2018; Anaafo et al.,
2024) to depict and identify vendor spaces. Second, urban vendor space
distribution has been identified based on geographical spatial information from urban governance event data and resident complaint data
collected by smart city governance platforms (Li et al., 2022). Third,
vendor spaces and vendors have been identified through street view
photographs and deep learning techniques (Liu & Liu, 2022).
There are numerous factors that influence the site selection of vendor
spaces. The location of vendor spaces is related to customer proximity,
as vendors tend to congregate around their target consumer populations
(Anaafo et al., 2024). It is also associated with population density, with a
new generation of informal street vendors increasingly appearing in the
centers of commercial districts (CBD) and tourist areas (Maneepong &
Walsh, 2013). Vendors often gather near schools (Widjajanti, 2016),
community parks, and squares (Sun et al., 2022).
Additionally, the accessibility of transportation plays a role, with
vendor spaces frequently located near transportation hubs, bus stops,
and major roads, allowing them to attract large customer flows while
facilitating their own travel (Anaafo et al., 2024; Maneepong & Walsh,
2013). The site selection of vendor spaces also depends on spatial costs.
Traditional vendors tend to cluster in densely populated areas and locations near lower-level roads, distancing themselves from CBDs and
high-rent areas (Liu & Liu, 2022).
The comfort level of the space is another consideration, as key factors
include the ease of placing, displaying, and storing goods, as well as
whether it offers buyers the freedom to move (Widjajanti, 2016).
Moreover, regulatory policies affect site selection; in response to threats
of eviction by police, vendors often congregate on sidewalks, public
lands, at bus stops, and street corners (Kazembe et al., 2019). Regarding
the mechanisms of influence, most studies are based on geographic
detectors, geographically weighted regression, and correlation analysis,
resulting in reflective values that do not capture the direction of influence of various factors (Yang et al., 2025). Some studies have employed
SHAP analysis, which can effectively explain the direction of influence,
but struggle to reflect spatial heterogeneity (Yi et al., 2024) and provide
precise spatial information for policy formulation.
Research on the characteristics of vendor spaces primarily focuses on
three aspects. First, vendor spaces exhibit spatiotemporal fluidity.
Vendors choose locations based on customer flow characteristics. For
example, informal street vendors tend to congregate around school
openings (from 6 AM to 8 AM) and closings (from 5 PM to 7 PM) on
weekdays, while on weekends, they gather in community parks and
squares (Sun et al., 2022). Moreover, to respond to urban management
and enforcement efforts, vendors continuously reconfigure their spaces
(Lindell, 2019), relying on informal relationships and networks to
migrate to relatively safer locations and operate at specific times of the
day (Adama, 2020). Second, vendor spaces also exhibit exclusivity.
There is a conflict between vendor spaces and public spaces. Vendors set
up semi-fixed stands, sidewalk stalls, and settlements (Pelaez-Higuera ´
et al., 2023), occupying public space through self-establishment,
attachment, overlaying, and intervention (Ojeda & Pino, 2019). The
extent of this conflict is closely related to the scale and form of informal
street vendors as well as their respective locations. Additionally, there
are internal conflicts within vendor spaces stemming from competition
for selling and storage areas (Widjajanti, 2016). Third, vendor spaces
can be destructive. They have a negative impact on the quality of the
surrounding built environment, manifesting in aspects such as aesthetic
disorder, encroachment on land usage cycles, visual obstructions,
improper waste disposal, and land use conversion (Farinmade et al.,
2018).
Vendor space management policies can be categorized into three
main types. The first type of policy involves the direct removal of vendor
spaces. Urban authorities often perceive street vending as a symbol of
underdevelopment, believing that vendor spaces negatively impact the
city’s image. For example, New York City has dispatched law enforcement to clear vendor spaces (Thomas Devlin, 2018; Boonjubun, 2017).
The second type of policy seeks to regulate the activities of commercial
vendors and incorporate their operations within a framework of urban
authorization. This is achieved through zoning, time controls, and urban
design, allowing informal street vendors to conduct economic activities
in clean, safe, and orderly vendor spaces (Huang et al., 2019;
Pelaez-Higuera ´ et al., 2023; Flock & Breitung, 2015; Ojeda & Pino,
2019; Martínez et al., 2018). The third type is an inclusive policy that
encourages the free development of vendor spaces without any regulation (Boonjubun, 2017; Liu & Liu, 2022).
Despite the rich research findings on vendor spaces, several limitations still exist. First, the identification of vendor spaces is challenging
and cannot cover the entire urban area. The vendor economy is characterized by mobility, flexibility, and opacity, making it difficult for
traditional data sources and methods to identify vendor spaces on an
urban scale. While interview surveys provide more accurate identification results, they often only reflect localized spatial conditions, failing to
cover the broader urban context, leaving the actual situation of vendor
spaces in the city unknown (Liu & Liu, 2022). Complaint data identification methods can identify a larger number of vendor spaces; however,
since the data is derived only from negative impact events, they can only
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
2
pinpoint problematic vendor spaces and cannot identify compliant,
issue-free vendor spaces, resulting in an incomplete coverage of the
entire urban area.
Street-view identification methods can accurately identify vendors
(Liu & Liu, 2022), but due to the randomness of street view photos and
inconsistencies in the timing of the photographs, the identified vendor
spaces may be incidental and do not accurately reflect the spatiotemporal distribution of vendor spaces in the city. Furthermore, since street
view photos are only available along urban road networks, the identification results are limited to areas adjacent to the roads. Second, the
analysis of location factors and spatial characteristics is often
case-specific. Due to the limitations of identification methods, the
existing location logic primarily stems from analyses of specific vendor
spaces at the street or block level (Li et al., 2018; Pelaez-Higuera ´ et al.,
2023; Martínez et al., 2017; Ojeda & Pino, 2019; Widjajanti, 2016), with
little systematic analysis of the location logic and spatial distribution
characteristics of vendor spaces from an urban perspective (Liu & Liu,
2022). Third, vendor management policies struggle to be effectively
implemented in space. The lack of a comprehensive analysis covering
the entire urban area makes it difficult to identify vendor space issues in
different locations, leading to management policy recommendations
that are not tailored to specific contexts.
Therefore, systematically identifying vendor locations across the city
is crucial. This study uses mobile phone signal data to develop a spatiotemporal screening method that accurately detects vendor locations
citywide. It further employs XGBoost and SHAP to analyze the mechanisms shaping these locations. An innovative integration of clustering
algorithms enables spatial clustering of the strength of variable influences, identifying vendors’ sensitive areas. This provides a theoretical
basis for vendor siting and management policies and will help governments determine which measures are most effective in which locations.
We treat vendor space as a data-driven planning problem, aiding sustainable urban development.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Study area
Wuhan, the capital of Hubei Province in China, is also known as the
’thoroughfare of nine provinces’ and is located at the center of China’s
economic geography (Fig. 1). It is also the largest inland traffic hub for
water, land, and air transportation in China, as well as the shipping
center of the middle Yangtze River. With a total area of 8569.15 km2 and
a resident population of 13.774 million in 2023, the city has a regional
GDP of 2001.165 billion yuan. Its superior transportation conditions,
traditional dock culture, large population base, and diverse urban spaces
make Wuhan a fertile ground for the vendor economy. This study focuses on the main urban area within the third ring road of Wuhan,
encompassing approximately 52,145 hectares and covering most regions of Wuchang District, Jiang’an District, Jianghan District, Qiaokou
District, Hanyang District, Qingshan District, and Hongshan District.
2.2. Data sources and processing
The data sources involved in this study are detailed in Table 1. The
mobile signaling data is sourced from China Unicom user data, covering
the period from June 3 to June 16, 2019. The data utilized is from before
the pandemic and has not been affected by public events or policy
regulations. June is the most comfortable time of year in Wuhan, and it
falls within a non-holiday period, avoiding any seasonal distortions.
Noise reduction processing was applied to the mobile signaling data
based on the DaaSBI data platform, which removed duplicate, redundant, and erroneous data, as well as encrypted mobile identification
numbers after excluding user attributes, ensuring that no personal information of mobile users is involved. The data includes fields such as
user codes, location grid numbers, residence start and end time information, and signaling duration. To quantitatively measure the spatial
aggregation of informal street vendors in different areas of the main
urban area. Considering the service radius of base stations: The coverage
area of communication base station cells is approximately 100 to 500 m
in urban areas and between 400 and 1000 m in suburban areas. This
study constructs a 500 × 500 m grid based on the spatial scale of most
functional groups in Wuhan (Chen et al., 2023), and performs zonal
statistics on the total distribution of urban vendor activity trajectories
Fig. 1. Location of study area (Source of the base map: http://www.guihuayun.com/).
Table 1
Sources of indicators.
Data name Source
Mobile phone signalling data China Unicom Subscriber Data
Building and Transportation Data https://www.tianditu.gov.cn
POI https://lbs.amap.com/
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
3
and built environment characteristics within each grid unit. All the data
has been de-identified in compliance with ethical requirements.
The POI data is sourced from Amap (https://lbs.amap.com/), which
includes data on residential communities, squares, dining facilities,
entertainment facilities, and more. After filtering, correcting, deduplicating, and spatial clipping for initial data cleaning, approximately 2000
valid POI data points were obtained. The road network data comes from
OpenStreetMap (https://www.openstreetmap.org/), from which valid
road network data was obtained through spatial correction and breakpoint repairs. The building data is acquired from Tian Di Tu (htt
ps://www.tianditu.gov.cn/), from which information such as building
footprint area and the number of floors is extracted. Population data is
derived from mobile signaling data.
2.3. Methods
2.3.1. Research framework
The research framework is divided into four parts (Fig. 2): (1) Based
on mobile signaling data, a time-crowd-space screening method is
constructed to identify urban vendor spaces and summarize their distribution characteristics. (2) An indicator system for influencing factors
is developed, and the optimal XGBoost model is selected by comparing
the results of OLS, Geographically Weighted Regression, and XGBoost to
train and simulate the relationships between various factors and the
vendor population. SHAP values are then used to explain the importance, driving direction, and dependence intervals of each factor. (3)
Based on the SHAP values of the various factors, K-Means, DBSCAN, and
Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering results are compared, with KMeans selected to cluster the SHAP values and identify sensitivity zones
for vendor spaces. (4) Policy recommendations are proposed from the
perspectives of vendor space structural regulation and site selection
guidance.
2.3.2. Time-space-population screening method
Mobile signaling data covers every mobile phone holder, encompassing a large amount of user and geographic information. It no longer
relies on small sample sampling, allowing for a better reflection of
overall temporal and spatial patterns, which makes the analysis results
more representative and reliable. On the other hand, mobile signaling
data is dynamic and reflects the real-time spatial positions of phone
holders, including movement trajectories and activity hotspots. This
makes mobile signaling data a powerful tool for studying population
mobility, urban activities, and spatial distribution issues. Therefore,
selecting mobile signaling data can somewhat alleviate the difficulties in
data sample extraction caused by the mobility, temporality, and instability characteristics of vendors.
Fig. 2. Research framework.
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
4
The timing of vendors’ operational activities is crucial for attracting
target user groups. There are differences in foot traffic and consumption
demands during different time periods, so vendors need to adjust their
business strategies based on the activity times and consumption habits of
their target users. By studying the temporal distribution of the target
user group, the most suitable time period for operations can be determined to provide products and services when user demand is highest.
This research selects target user groups from a temporal perspective,
making judgments and establishing screening rules based on the travel
characteristics of vendor populations to measure the geographic locations of vendor spaces. Ultimately, the following screening rules are
formulated (Fig. 3).
(1) Preliminary Screening
The peak hours for vendors to set up their stalls are selected as
follows: morning from 6:00 to 9:00, midday from 11:00 to 14:00,
and evening from 17:00 to 00:00. Users whose signaling data
occurs within these three time periods are filtered and labeled as
Database A.
Considering factors such as time costs and distance costs
associated with changing stall locations, vendors are generally
inclined to choose a fixed location for their operations, and the
duration typically exceeds 2 h. Thus, we screened from database
A users who accumulated at least 2 h in the same grid cell and
who appeared on at least 9 of the 14 days (to exclude typical
informal-economy workers such as home-visit installers), and
labeled them as database B.
(2) Identifying Permanent Residents
The study first screens each user in Database B, filtering those
who appeared at the same base station for a cumulative total of 4
h or more during the nighttime from 10 PM to 5 AM on at least 9
out of 14 days between June 3 and June 16, 2019. These users are
labeled as Database C.
(3) Identifying Regular Employees
In contrast to the instability of business activities among
informal employment groups such as vendors, this study defines
individuals with long-term and stable work locations and hours
within a specific time period as regular employees. To identify
regular employees, each user in Database B is screened for those
who appeared at the same base station for a cumulative total of 4
h or more during the working hours from 9 AM to 7 PM on at least
6 out of 10 days between June 3 to 7 and June 10 to 14, 2019.
These users are labeled as Database D.
(4) Identifying Occasional Leisure Population
The leisure population exhibits more flexibility compared to
the vendor group and typically does not choose to stay at the
same location for multiple days. Therefore, users who appear in
the same unit fewer than 2 times during the statistical period are
labeled as occasional leisure population and marked as Database
E.
(5) Identifying Vendor Population
First, users who meet the duration requirements for vending
during peak hours are identified. Based on this, the permanent
residents and regular employees are filtered out. Thus, the vendor
population can be approximated within a certain margin of error
as follows: Vendor Population = Target Period Stay Population B
- Permanent Residents C - Regular Employees D - Occasional
Leisure Population E.
Fig. 3. Vendor Population Screening Method.
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
5
2.3.3. Cold and hot spot analysis (Getis-Ord G*) method
Cold and hot spot analysis typically uses the Local Getis-Ord G* index
method to determine whether there are statistically significant highvalue and low-value areas within a specific region (Yang et al., 2024).
The hot spot analysis tool calculates the Getis-Ord G* index for each data
element in the dataset and obtains a z-score. By assessing the magnitude
of the z-scores, it is possible to determine the degree of spatial clustering
of the elements. The spatial location of the clustering hotspots can then
be obtained based on the geographic location of the elements themselves. The calculation formula is:
G∗
i (d) = ∑n
j
Wij(d)Xj
/∑Xj (1)
The standardized form of G∗
i (d) is obtained as follows:
Z
(
G∗
i
)
= G∗
i − E
(
G∗
i
)
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Var(
G∗
i
√ )
(2)
where E
(
G∗
i
)
and Var(
G∗
i
)
represent the expected value and variance of
G∗
i , respectively. Wij is the spatial weight. If Z
(
G∗
i
)
is positive and high, it
indicates that the values surrounding ii are relatively high and exhibit
spatial clustering characteristics, indicating a hot spot area. Conversely,
if Z
(
G∗
i
)
is negative, it suggests that the values surrounding ii are relatively low and do not exhibit spatial clustering characteristics, indicating a cold spot area. Furthermore, when Z
(
G∗
i
) is positive and the
score is higher, the degree of clustering for hot spots increases.
Conversely, when Z
(
G∗
i
)
is negative and the score is lower, the degree of
clustering for cold spots also increases (Zhang et al., 2024). To understand the clustering characteristics of vendors space, we used this
technique to explore the distribution of hotspots and cold spots of street
vendors in Wuhan.
2.3.4. Functional mixture degree
The functional mixture degree represents the diversity of functions in
a certain area. A higher mixture degree indicates greater diversity in that
area, meaning it can provide more urban functions and have a more
comprehensive variety of functions. The calculation formula is:
Pi = Ti
Ai
(3)
Smin = −
∑n
i
Pi ×
( logPi
log10)
(4)
where Pi represents the proportion of a certain type of POI within a
defined unit, Ti denotes the number of that type of POI in unit i , Ai
represents the total number of POIs in unit i, and Smin indicates the
functional mixture degree. The value of the functional mixture degree
ranges from 0 to 1, with values closer to 1 indicating a more even distribution of various functions within the defined unit. We treated
functional mixture degree as a variable to explore its nonlinear impact
on the spatial distribution of street vendors.
2.3.5. Pearson correlation coefficient
The Pearson correlation coefficient is used to measure the strength of
the linear relationship between two variables (Wang et al., 2024). The
calculation formula is:
r =
∑n
i=1(xi − x)(yi − y) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑ ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ n
i=1(xi − x)
2∑n
i=1(yi − y)
2
√ (5)
where xi and yi represent the i th observed values of variables x and y,
respectively.x and y are the averages of the two variables, n is the
number of observations, and r is the correlation coefficient, which
ranges from − 1 to 1, where 0 indicates no linear relationship, positive
values indicate a positive correlation, and negative values indicate a
negative correlation. We used correlation coefficients to investigate the
relationships between the variables that influence the spatial distribution of street vendors and excluded some redundant variables based on
the degree of multicollinearity.
2.3.6. XGBoost
XGBoost is an efficient machine learning algorithm based on the
gradient boosting framework (Yang et al., 2025). It prevents overfitting
through regularization, approximates the loss function more accurately
using a second-order Taylor expansion, and selects the optimal tree
structure through split gain, thereby efficiently generating models. It
stands out in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and generalization ability,
and is widely used in tasks such as classification, regression, and
ranking. The calculation formula is:
ŷi = ∑k
k=1
fk(xi), fk ∈ F (6)
where ŷi is the predicted value for the i th sample, fk(xi) is the predicted
value from the k th tree for the sample xi, and F is the set of all possible
tree structures. Here, ŷi represents the predicted spatial density of street
vendors, and xi represents the selected influencing factors.
2.3.7. SHAP
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) is a model interpretation
method based on the Shapley value from game theory (Yang et al.,
2025), used to quantify the contribution of each feature to the model’s
predictions, addressing the "black box" problem of XGBoost models. It
can provide local explanations for individual predictions (such as force
plots) to illustrate the specific direction (positive/negative) and strength
of each feature’s impact on a single sample’s prediction, as well as reveal
the core features relied upon by XGBoost through global feature
importance ranking (such as summary plots). Its formula is as follows:
∅i = ∑
S⊆F\{i}
|S|!(n − |S| − 1)!
n! [v(S ∪ {i})− v(S)] (7)
where ∅i is the SHAP value of feature i; F is the set of all features; S is a
subset of feature set F that does not include feature i; |S| is the size of
subset S; and v(S) is the output value (contribution) when the model
makes predictions using only the features in subset S. The use of SHAP in
this work primarily serves the following tasks:
(1) exploring the importance of influencing factors to identify the
most and least significant factors;
(2) identifying key thresholds for variables based on SHAP dependence plots, providing the most reasonable thresholds to attract
street vendor populations or mitigate their distribution;
(3) after obtaining the SHAP values for the variables in different regions, we linked them to spatial coordinates, associating the
SHAP values with their corresponding spatial distributions. This
is possible because we used vector data for modeling, where each
variable and the Y value are accompanied by coordinate
information;
(4) utilizing GeoSHAP to derive the spatial heterogeneity of variable
impact intensity, indicating that the influence of variables varies
in different regions. Using the GeoSHAP distribution of all variables as initial input for clustering, we obtain sensitivity zones.
Policy recommendations are provided, such as in high-sensitivity
areas, where adding a few recreational facilities or roads could
attract a large number of street vendors, while in low-sensitivity
areas, the effects of such additions may be minimal.
2.3.8. K-Means
K-Means is an unsupervised learning clustering algorithm whose
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
6
primary goal is to partition data points into k distinct clusters, such that
the data points within the same cluster have high similarity, while data
points in different clusters have low similarity. By iteratively optimizing
the positions of centroids and the assignment of samples, it minimizes
the sum of squared errors within clusters, thereby optimizing the clustering result (Kim & Kim, 2023). Its formula is as follows:
J = ∑k
i=1
∑
x∈Ci
‖ x − μi
‖2 (8)
where J represents the sum of squared errors within clusters, k is the
predetermined number of clusters, Ci is the sample set of the i th cluster,
μi is the centroid (geometric center) of the i th cluster, and ‖ x − μi
‖ is the
Euclidean distance from sample x to centroid μi
. We used this conventional clustering method to cluster all GeoSHAP raster variables,
resulting in sensitivity zones. The meaning of sensitive partitioning
represents the sensitivity of vendor space to changes in variables. In
areas with high positive sensitivity, a small increase in infrastructure
(such as recreational facilities) can lead to a substantial increase in
vendor space. In areas with low positive sensitivity, this effect is
somewhat diminished, while in areas with negative sensitivity, the
impact is reversed.
2.3.9. DBSCAN
DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with
Noise) is a density-based clustering algorithm (Li et al., 2021) that can
partition data points in high-density regions into clusters and identify
noise points in low-density areas. Unlike algorithms such as K-Means,
DBSCAN does not require a predetermined number of clusters and is
capable of discovering clusters of arbitrary shapes. It first calculates the
distances between sample points to determine the ε-neighborhood,
which is defined by the following formula:
d(p, q) =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ∑n
i=1
(pi − qi)
2
√
(9)
where p and q are two data points, n is the number of dimensions, pi and
qi are the values of sample points p and q in the i th dimensional feature,
and d(p, q) is the Euclidean distance between sample points p and q.
Then, core points are selected to determine whether to initiate a new
cluster or perform density expansion, which is defined by the following
formula:
|Nε(P)| ≥ MinPts (10)
where Nε(P) represents the ε-neighborhood of the sample point P, which
is the set of all sample points whose distance from P is less than or equal
to ε; |Nε(P)| is the number of sample points within the ε-neighborhood
(including the point P itself); and MinPts is the minimum number of
samples required to consider a point as a core point. We used this
clustering method to cluster all GeoSHAP raster variables and compared
it with the K-Means method.
2.3.10. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering
Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering (Gao et al., 2025) is a
bottom-up clustering method that builds a hierarchy by progressively
merging the closest clusters until all samples are combined into a single
large cluster or a stopping condition is met, ultimately resulting in a
tree-like structure (dendrogram). Different levels of clustering results
can be obtained by cutting the dendrogram. The distance between all
pairs of clusters can be calculated using methods including Single
Linkage (minimum distance), Complete Linkage (maximum distance),
Average Linkage (mean distance), Centroid Linkage, and Ward Linkage.
In this study, the Ward method is chosen. The formula for cluster C is as
follows:
ESS(C) = ∑
x∈C
(x − mx)
T
(x − mx) (11)
where mx represents the mean of the sample points in cluster C. It can be
observed that ESS measures the cohesion of the sample points within a
cluster; the more tightly the sample points are aggregated, the smaller
the ESS value. The Ward method aims to find a merging strategy that
minimizes the increase in the sum of ESS for the new series of clusters
formed after merging, relative to the sum of ESS for the clusters before
the merge. We used this clustering method to cluster all GeoSHAP raster
variables and compared it with the two aforementioned methods.
2.3.11. Construction of influencing factor indicator system
Based on existing research on the logic of informal street vendor
spatial location, the influencing factors for informal street vendor locations can be divided into three categories. First, there are consumer
demand factors. The spatial distribution of informal street vendors is
influenced by market size and the diversity of the consumer population.
The size of the market directly determines the number of potential
customers and sales volume for informal businesses, leading vendors to
prefer locations in densely populated and built-up areas. Additionally,
the diversity of the consumer population affects the distribution of
informal vendors, as varying consumer demands encourage informal
businesses to offer a range of products and services (Anaafo et al., 2024).
Second, there are facility density factors. Informal street vendor spaces
do not exist in isolation; they often cluster around public service facilities such as schools, hospitals (Widjajanti, 2016), parks, squares (Sun
et al., 2022), and shopping malls (Maneepong & Walsh, 2013), which
provide differentiated vendor services. Third, there are transportation
accessibility factors. Areas with high transportation accessibility facilitate frequent population movement, offering more trading opportunities
for informal street vendors (Widjajanti, 2016) and making it easier for
vendors to travel (Kazembe et al., 2019). Ultimately, the following indicator system has been formed (Table 2).
Using the number of informal street vendors as the dependent variable and various influencing factors as independent variables, the
Pearson correlation coefficient method was first employed to calculate
the correlations between the variables. The results showed that all pairs
of variables were correlated. Next, an OLS model was used to test
whether the aforementioned factors were collinear with the number of
informal street vendors. The VIF values for PPD, WPD, and FMD
exceeded 7.5 (Fig 4), leading to their exclusion. Ultimately, 13 factors
were identified as influencing elements.
3. Results
3.1. Spatial identification and feature analysis of informal street vendors
in Wuhan city
3.1.1. Spatial distribution of informal street vendors in Wuhan city
At a grid scale of 500 × 500 m, mobile signaling data was used to
identify 1.21 million data points in Wuhan’s urban central area that
conform to informal street vendor behavior rules. These data points
were aggregated and statistically summarized within the grids to indicate the intensity of informal street vendor activities in different urban
sectors (Fig. 5). Using the Getis-Ord Gi hot spot analysis tool, highconfidence hot spots and cold spots of informal street vendor distribution within the third ring road of Wuhan were identified. The results
were categorized by statistical significance, with the 90 % significance
level defined as Level 1 hot spots, the 95 % significance level defined as
Level 2 hot spots, and the 99 % significance level defined as Level 3 hot
spots, leading to the identification of spatial aggregation areas for
informal street vendors in Wuhan (Fig. 6).
The distribution of informal street vendor activities in Wuhan’s main
urban area is uneven. Excluding water bodies, 6.5 % of spatial units in
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
7
the main urban area are identified as cold spots, while 12.2 % are hot
spots, resulting in an overall spatial distribution pattern characterized
by "hot in the west and cold in the east." From the perspective of urban
location conditions, informal street vendors are primarily concentrated
within and around the second ring road of Wuhan, with high-density
areas of vendor activity forming in central districts such as Jianghan,
Wuchang, and Hongshan. This concentration combines with major
communities and business districts to create two primary hot spots and
three secondary hot spots.
In contrast, the distribution of vendors in eastern urban areas, such
as Jiang’an, Qingshan, and Donghu, is relatively sparse. The identified
cold spots correspond to areas within the main urban area that are less
developed, such as the northern economic development zone of Jiang’an
District and ecological scenic areas and resort areas on both sides of
northern Donghu Lake. Overall, the spatial distribution pattern of vendors displays a characteristic of being extensive and diverse to the west
of the Yangtze River, while being concentrated in patches and exhibiting
clear hot and cold zones to the east. The reasons for the formation of
each vendor clustering area vary and may encompass local regulations,
socioeconomic exclusion, and cultural traditions.
In Wuhan, some clustering areas are located near water bodies, while
others are in the central urban districts, which is related to the city’s
riverside culture. Additionally, the construction of greenway projects
around East Lake has strictly restricted its distribution.
3.1.2. Analysis of characteristics of informal street vendor aggregation
areas
The identified hot spots are overlaid and analyzed in relation to
urban buildings, roads, and facilities. This analysis, combined with data
from on-site surveys and field investigations, further explores the effects
of urban functions and environmental factors on the spatial choices of
informal street vendors from a meso‑micro perspective.
The main aggregation areas include the Changqing Zone and the
Luojia Port Zone (see Fig. 7). The grid-like road network in the
Changqing area encourages a "patchy aggregation" feature of vendors,
expanding outward around the Fuxing urban village and Changqing
Park, with an extension towards the Second Ring Road in the southwest
direction. The consumer group in this area mainly consists of community residents; therefore, to cater to consumer needs, the vendors primarily offer categories that meet daily needs, such as food snacks, fruits
and vegetables, daily necessities, clothing and footwear, and miscellaneous goods.
The Luojia Port area represents a comprehensive aggregation zone
for vendors, with an overall spatial layout that primarily forms a "linear
aggregation" pattern extending southwest along the Second Ring Road.
This area has developed into a major hot spot relying on nearby colleges,
communities, and wholesale centers. Since the consumers in this region
consist not only of community residents but also a large number of
college students and formal commercial consumers, the vendors offer a
wider variety of products. In addition to daily items such as food snacks,
fruits and vegetables, daily necessities, clothing and footwear, and
miscellaneous goods, there are also offerings related to entertainment
products.
Moreover, the vendor aggregation area adjacent to Luojia Port is
mainly distributed along Renhe Road, forming a prominent hot spot
near the Wugang Sports Center, and extending into the surrounding
community. In terms of business types, the consumer group in this area
primarily consists of community residents, thus the vendors also focus
mainly on daily needs categories such as food snacks, fruits and vegetables, daily necessities, clothing and footwear, and miscellaneous
goods.
The secondary aggregation areas include the Erqi Area, Nanhu Area,
Jianghan Road, and Hanxi Road (Fig. 7). Jianghan Road and Hanzheng
Street are important commercial districts in Wuhan, where the vendor
space is primarily characterized by "patchy aggregation," with highdensity areas forming at intersections. In the Jianghan Road commercial district, informal street vendors serve as a complement to formal
businesses such as supermarkets, mainly offering snacks, accessories,
toys, and daily necessities. The vendors in the Hanzheng Street commercial district focus on serving nearby residents around older communities, talent apartments, and public service facilities such as
hospitals and schools, primarily providing items that fulfill residential
needs.
The Erqi Area is a typical open informal street vendor aggregation
zone, concentrated around the Hankou Riverfront and the riverside
greenbelt, with some vendors gathered in the Houhu community and
extending along Yexing Road towards the Yayuan Dream City. The
consumer group in this area mainly consists of community residents,
leading vendors to focus on business types that cater to daily needs, such
as food snacks, fruits and vegetables, daily necessities, clothing and
Table 2
Influencing Factors of Informal street vendor Spatial Location.
Level 1 indicators Level 2
indicators
Abbreviation Meaning
Consumer
Demand
Present
population
density
PPD Users who stay for >20
min during the three time
periods of 6:00–9:00;
11:00–14:00; 17:00–0:00
every day
Residential
population
density
RPD Users who are present at
the same base station for a
cumulative total of four
hours or more between
22:00 pm. and 5:00 pm.
each day
Working
population
density
WPD Users present at the same
base station for a total of
four hours or more
between 9 a.m. and 19
pm.
Floor area FA Sum of the areas of the
floors of the building
Functional
mixing degree
FMD Combined mix of various
POI facilities
Facility Density Recreational
facilities
density
RFD Including theatres,
cinemas, resorts
Public service
facilities
density
PFD Including educational
facilities, cultural
facilities, medical
facilities and sports
facilities
Open space
density
OSD Including parks and
squares
Catering
facilities
density
CaFD Including restaurants,
milk tea shops
Commercial
facility density
CoFD Including all kinds of
department stores,
supermarkets, shopping
centres, home building
materials market, etc.
Business office
facilities
density
BFD Including offices and
industrial parks
Transportation
Accessibility
Traffic facilities
density
TFD Including bus stops, metro
stations, car parks
Inlet and outlet
density
IOD Including station
entrances, residential
complex entrances, car
park entrances and
entrances to other large
facilities
Trunk road
density
TRD Length of main roads per
unit of land area
Secondary
artery density
SAD Length of secondary roads
per unit of land area
Intersection
density
InD Includes all types of road
junctions
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
8
footwear, and miscellaneous goods.
Hanxi Road serves as a district-level commercial center, where the
vendor space predominantly extends along Jiefang Avenue into the side
streets, forming a "linear aggregation" around Pan Yue Mall, the riverside greening area, and the Zongguan community. The consumer group
in this area includes community residents, tourists, and young people,
thus vendors primarily sell food snacks, fruits and vegetables, daily
necessities, as well as toys, entertainment products, and fashion items.
The Nanhu Area is a large urban living space, where the vendor space
exhibits a "linear aggregation" pattern, creating multiple nodes in the
Nanhu community, Binguocheng, and the building materials market.
The business types here are also characterized by diversity, including
supplementary goods for the building materials market, daily necessities
for residents, and snacks and toys aimed at park visitors.
Overall, there are two main types of primary informal street vendor
aggregation areas. The first type is attached to large communities,
providing food snacks, fruits and vegetables, and daily necessities to
these communities. The second type is affiliated with colleges, sports
centers, and communities, offering food snacks, fruits and vegetables,
daily necessities, and entertainment products.
The secondary informal street vendor aggregation areas can also be
categorized into two types (Table 3). The first type relies on large
commercial streets, commercial entities, and communities, serving as a
complement to the formal economy by providing daily necessities and
food snacks. The second type centers around public service facilities
such as hospitals and schools, offering targeted goods for specific demand groups.
3.2. Influencing mechanisms of informal street vendor space distribution
3.2.1. Comparison of fitted models
To understand the mechanisms by which various influencing factors
affect the spatial distribution of informal street vendors, we compared
several machine learning models and deep learning models to select the
best regression analysis method (Table 4). The MLP model consists of
three linear layers and two ReLU layers. The ResNet is composed of two
Fig. 4. Correlation and Collinearity Test Results (The left side shows the correlation heatmap of the variables, while the right side presents the results of the
collinearity test).
Fig. 5. Spatial Distribution Map of Informal street vendors.
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
9
standard residual blocks and one linear layer. The Transformer is
generated using the TransformerEncoderLayer module from PyTorch.
The GNN consists of two GCN modules and two ReLU activations, with
an adjacency matrix built using KNN (k = 5), where the coordinates used
are the centroids of each grid cell. All these deep learning models have a
learning rate of 0.001.
The results show that in terms of model fit, the R² value of XGBoost is
significantly higher than that of OLS and GWR, reaching 0.9884, indicating that XGBoost has greater explanatory power. In terms of Mean
Absolute Error (MAE), the MAE value of XGBoost is much lower than
that of OLS and GWR, approaching 1, which signifies a higher prediction
accuracy. Furthermore, in terms of RMSE, XGBoost still demonstrates
better predictive precision. Therefore, this study selects XGBoost for
regression analysis, using the default parameters (n_estimators = 100,
max_depth = 6, learning_rate = 0.3), which has already achieved
satisfactory results under these conditions. In this task, the performance
of deep learning models was not as good as that of machine learning
models (with the Transformer showing the best performance among the
deep learning models). This may be due to the limited sample size, as
there are only 1711 sample points within the 500 m x 500 m grids in
Wuhan. Additionally, to achieve maximum fitting effectiveness, we
employed an in-bag training strategy, meaning that no separate test set
was established.
3.2.2. Impact mechanism analysis based on SHAP
(1) Analysis of the Importance of Influencing Factors
As shown in Fig. 8, the top five factors in terms of importance ranking
are Recreational Facility Density (RFD), Residential Population Density
(RPD), Floor Area (FA), Commercial Facility Density (CoFD), and
Catering Facility Density (CaFD), while the factor with the least impact
is Open Space Density (OSD). In terms of classification importance, the
facility density factors have the greatest influence on the distribution of
vendors, followed by transportation environment factors, and finally
consumer demand factors. From the perspective of average importance
across different types of factors, consumer demand factors have the
highest average importance, followed by facility density factors, and
finally transportation environment factors.
(2) Analysis of the Driving Directions of Influencing Factors
From the SHAP beehive plot (Fig. 9), it can be observed that higher
values of Recreational Facility Density (RFD) are associated with higher
SHAP values. Moreover, there are more red points distributed along the
positive axis of SHAP, while blue points are primarily found along the
negative axis. This indicates a positive correlation between recreational
facility density and vendor population distribution; in areas where
recreational facilities are more concentrated, the density of vendors is
also higher. This is because recreational facilities complement vendor
services well, attracting a large number of consumers at specific times
for formal recreational activities, while vendors provide informal and
diverse selling services before and after these activities.
Similarly, Residential Population Density (RPD), Floor Area (FA),
Intersection Density (IoD), Ingress/Egress Density (InD), and Traffic
Road Density (TRD) are also positively correlated with the distribution
of vendor populations. This suggests that vendors are more likely to
cluster in areas with high residential population density, large floor
areas, high intersection density, concentrated road crossings, and high
arterial road density.
On the other hand, high values of Catering Facility Density (CaFD)
and Temporary Facility Density (TFD) are mostly distributed along the
negative axis of SHAP, while low values are predominantly found along
the positive axis. This indicates a negative correlation with vendor
population distribution—in regions where catering facilities are more
concentrated, vendor populations tend to decrease. While formal dining
establishments can provide potential customers for vendors, most of the
vendor services overlap with dining services. As customers who have
dined in restaurants are less likely to purchase food from vendors afterwards, the exclusionary effect of formal dining establishments outweighs the complementary effect on vendor spaces.
Areas with sparse transportation facilities such as bus stops, subway
stations, and parking lots are more attractive to vendor populations.
Regions with inadequate transportation infrastructure are often underdeveloped urban areas with insufficient service facilities and low consumption levels, providing vendors with a natural space to thrive.
Low values of Commercial Facility Density (CoFD) are generally
found in the negative SHAP value range, indicating that a low density of
commercial facilities suppresses the aggregation of vendors. When
commercial facilities are sparse, the commercial atmosphere lacks
Fig. 6. Analysis of Cold and Hot Spots in the Distribution of Informal street vendor Populations and Identification of Aggregation Areas.
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
10
vibrancy, making it difficult to attract customers, which is not conducive
to vendor clustering. However, high values of commercial facility density are found in both the positive and negative SHAP value ranges,
mostly concentrated in the negative range. This shows that when commercial facility density is high, it has both suppressing and promoting
effects on vendor populations, with a predominant suppressing effect.
The balance of these effects depends on whether the service types
overlap; if they do, the presence of commercial facilities will squeeze the
vendors’ operating space. On the other hand, if the service types do not
overlap, this creates a large customer base for vendors.
High values of Secondary Arterial Density (SAD) are mostly found in
the positive SHAP value range, indicating that a higher density of
secondary roads promotes the aggregation of vendor populations. In
regions with high secondary road density, there is frequent population
movement, and slower vehicle speeds allow for pedestrian flow to
linger, providing vendors with customer sources and sales opportunities,
which is beneficial for aggregation. However, low values exist in both
positive and negative SHAP value ranges, but mostly in the negative
range, showing that a lower density of secondary roads has both suppressing and promoting effects on vendor populations, with a predominant suppressing effect. When secondary road density is low, there are
fewer foot traffic opportunities for vendors. Nevertheless, there may also
be fewer commercial establishments, which could benefit vendor aggregation in areas lacking certain commercial stores (e.g., industrial
Fig. 7. Relationship Diagram of Main Informal street vendor Aggregation Areas and Surrounding Built Environment (A: Changqing Area; B: Luojia Port Area; C:
Jianghan Road and Hanzheng Street Business District; D: Erqi Area; E: Hanxi Road Business District; F: Nanhu Area).
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
11
Table 3
Characteristics of Informal street vendor Aggregation Areas in the Main Urban Zone of Wuhan.
Type of space for
vendors
Agglomeration area Dependent space Layout features Business format
Major clusters
A:Changqing Cluster Large neighbourhoods, urban villages,
railway stations
patchy agglomeration Daily necessities, recreational
goods, fashion goods
B:Lujiagang Cluster Communities, colleges, wholesale
markets, shopping malls
Belt agglomeration predominates, with
localised piecemeal agglomeration
Daily necessities, toys,
recreational products
Secondary
catchment area
C:Jianghan Road and Hanzheng
Street Business District
Communities, shopping streets,
secondary schools, hospitals, marinas
patchy agglomeration Daily necessities, snacks and
catering
D:Erqi district Neighbourhoods, parks, shopping malls patchy agglomeration daily necessity
E:Hanxi Road Shopping District Neighbourhoods, parks, shopping malls,
shopping streets
banded aggregation Daily necessities, snacks and
catering
F:Nanhu district Communities, building materials
markets, shopping malls
banded aggregation Daily necessities, building
materials, recreational goods
Table 4
Comparison of Results from All Competing Models.
Model OLS GWR RF CATBoost MLP ResNet Transformer GNN XGBoost
R² 0.2738 0.4320 0.8882 0.9745 0.5214 0.7611 0.9525 0.6492 0.9884
MAE 24.4851 22.0913 9.4685 5.3654 19.2001 15.0045 7.3467 18.0871 3.2876
RMSE 38.9148 34.4123 15.2673 7.2870 31.5899 20.5486 9.9535 27.7467 4.9085
Fig. 8. Ranking of the contribution rates of driving factors (the proportion inside the circle represents the total contribution of all factors, the dotted line represents
the average contribution of each major category).
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
12
parks).
Low values of Business Facility Density (BFD), Public Service Facility
Density (PFD), and Open Space Density (OSD) are generally clustered
near zero on the SHAP scale, suggesting that low densities of these facilities have negligible suppressing or promoting effects on vendor
populations. However, high values are distributed across both positive
and negative SHAP ranges, with a predominance in the positive range,
indicating that higher densities of the three types of facilities have both
suppressing and promoting effects on vendor aggregation, with promoting effects being more pronounced. Higher densities of business
offices, public services, and open spaces attract immediate consumer
demand from workers, students, patients, and leisure seekers (e.g.,
breakfast, snacks), promoting vendor clustering. However, these areas
may also impose restrictions on vending activities (e.g., in star-rated
office buildings, government departments, municipal plazas), which
can inhibit vendor aggregation.
In summary, RFD, RPD, FA, IoD, InD, and TRD are positively
correlated with vendor population aggregation, while CaFD and TFD are
negatively correlated. CoFD, SAD, BFD, PFD, and OSD exhibit both
suppressing and promoting effects on vendor population aggregation.
(3) Analysis of the Dependency of Influencing Factors and Critical
Thresholds
Fig. 10 illustrates the dependency relationships between various
factors and the vendor population. Through Lowess regression analysis,
it is found that Residential Population Density (RPD) maintains a positive correlation with SHAP values. When RPD exceeds 2664.37 p /km2,
it promotes vendor population aggregation, and when it surpasses
32,000 p/km², all sample points show a positive impact. The promoting
range of RPD for vendor population aggregation is (2664.37, +∞), while
its suppressing range is (0, 2664.37). It is worth noting that the applicability of this threshold in other cities requires further evaluation.
Similarly, the promoting ranges for other factors regarding vendor
population aggregation are as follows:
• Floor Area (FA) ∈ (268,443.66, +∞)
• Recreational Facility Density (RFD) ∈ (8.66, +∞)
• Public Facility Density (PFD) ∈ (12.98, +∞)
• Open Space Density (OSD) ∈ (4.38, +∞)
• Catering Facility Density (CaFD) ∈ (0, 726.43)
• Commercial Facility Density (CoFD) ∈ (74.96, 1548.58)
• Business Facility Density (BFD) ∈ (15.99, +∞)
• Temporary Facility Density (TFD) ∈ (0, 10.01) ∪ (17.60, 30.14) ∪
(187.96, +∞)
• Intersection Density (IOD) ∈ (37.26, +∞)
• Traffic Road Density (TRD) ∈ (2345.8, +∞)
• Secondary Arterial Density (SAD) ∈ (0, 471.29) ∪ (2200.66,
6085.07)
The suppressing ranges for these factors regarding vendor population
aggregation are:
• FA ∈ (0, 268,443.66)
• RFD ∈ (0, 8.66)
• PFD ∈ (0, 12.98)
• OSD ∈ (0, 4.38)
• CaFD ∈ (726.43, +∞)
• CoFD ∈ (0, 74.96) ∪ (1548.58, +∞)
• BFD ∈ (0, 15.99)
• TFD ∈ (10.01, 17.60) ∪ (30.14, 187.96)
• IOD ∈ (0, 37.26)
• TRD ∈ (0, 2345.8)
• SAD ∈ (471.29, 2200.66) ∪ (6085.07, +∞)
Fig. 9. Beeswarm plot for feature importance of drivers (The color represents the magnitude of the variable’s value, with redder colors indicating higher values and
bluer colors indicating lower values).
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
13
3.3. Other interpretable methods (PDP)
Additionally, to compare the reliability of the SHAP method, we
utilized a PDP-based explanation method for comparison (Fig 11). The
PDP can illustrate the functional relationship of one or two feature
variables’ impact on model prediction results: approximating linear
relationships, monotonic relationships, or more complex relationships
(Zhao et al., 2025). From this comparison, it is evident that the lowess
fitting curve of the scatter plot obtained using the SHAP method is
generally consistent with the PDP results. However, PDP only reflects
the average level of the feature variables, neglecting the impact of data
heterogeneity on the results and failing to quantify the heterogeneity at
the spatial level. Despite this limitation, the variability observed in these
variables indicates that they have significant effects on the distribution
of informal street vendors.
3.4. Vendor space sensitivity zoning
Based on the spatial distribution of SHAP values for various
influencing factors (Fig. 12), K-Means, DBSCAN, and Agglomerative
Hierarchical Clustering methods are employed to cluster the SHAP
values. This analysis further delineates sensitivity zones for vendors in
Wuhan, providing scientific support for the guidance and management
of vendor spaces.
3.4.1. Determination of the number of clusters
The number of clusters for K-Means and Agglomerative Hierarchical
Clustering is determined based on the inflection point of the silhouette
coefficient, as we aim to balance diversity and rationality in partitioning. The silhouette coefficient scores for both algorithms, along with the
dendrogram from the hierarchical clustering algorithm, guide us to
choose 4 clusters (Fig 13). The parameter sensitivity analysis for the
DBSCAN algorithm is shown in Table 5. We analyzed the results obtained from all parameters and found a substantial number of noise
points (− 1 class, which can be regarded as points from all other classes),
demonstrating the failure of this method in this context. We present the
best results when eps = 0.3 and min_samples = 7, resulting in 3 clusters,
which yield the highest silhouette coefficient (the spatial distribution
Fig. 10. Dependence of variables on PV (a fitted line is drawn using LOWESS, with a mark at 0 to distinguish the critical point between positive and negative
contributions).
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
14
patterns of the − 1 class for other parameter results are similar to this).
3.4.2. Sensitivity partitioning results
The final partitioning results are shown in Fig. 14. Although the
DBSCAN algorithm has a high silhouette coefficient, it is ineffective
when applied to the sensitivity partitioning of vendor spaces. The other
two types of algorithms produced more reasonable spatial partitions,
including positive high sensitivity areas, positive low sensitivity areas,
negative low sensitivity areas, and negative high sensitivity areas. Based
on the silhouette coefficient scores (Fig. 13), the classification results of
K-Means are more ideal than those of Agglomerative Hierarchical
Clustering, making it the chosen method for the final sensitivity
partitioning.
K-Means has classified the sensitivity of vendor spaces into four regions, where Region 0 and Region 3 are negative sensitivity areas, while
Region 1 and Region 2 are positive sensitivity areas. Region 2 is identified as a positive high sensitivity area, meaning that increases in
various feature values will significantly promote the aggregation of the
vendor population. Region 0 is classified as a negative high sensitivity
area, where increases in most feature values will significantly inhibit the
aggregation of the vendor population. It is noteworthy that some features have a positive influence on the aggregation of the vendor population (e.g., CaFD, OSD, TFD, and SAD). In Region 3, the average SHAP
values of the features are close to zero, indicating the lowest sensitivity
and a negligible effect on the aggregation of the vendor population.
From an impact perspective, the effects of each feature on the aggregation of the vendor population exhibit spatial heterogeneity. The
same type of feature demonstrates different influencing mechanisms in
different regions (Fig. 14a and b). RFD shows a strong promoting effect
on the aggregation of the vendor population in Region 2, a strong
inhibiting effect in Region 0, a weak promoting effect in Region 1, and
almost no effect in Region 3. Additionally, the core influencing factors
vary across different types of regions. In Region 2, the core influencing
factors, ranked from highest to lowest, are RFD, CoFD, FA, CaFD, and
RPD. In Region 0, the core influencing factors, also ranked from highest
to lowest, are RFD, RPD, IOD, and CaFD."
This study proposed the time-population-space screening method
based on mobile signaling data, successfully identifying vendor spaces in
the main urban area of Wuhan. Compared to other methods for identifying vendor spaces, this approach has several advantages.
In addition, we compared Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) clustering with spectral clustering. GMM assumes that the data is generated
from multiple Gaussian distributions and fits the model using the
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. Spectral clustering computes the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the data similarity matrix to
project the data into a lower-dimensional space for clustering. The results are shown in Fig. 15. From the perspective of partition planning,
the results of spectral clustering are not ideal, as the discrimination is
insufficient, resulting in a large number of class 0 regions. Meanwhile,
the GMM clustering method also produces a partition result where class
0 represents areas of high positive sensitivity, similar to the positive high
sensitivity regions generated by K-means. Regions 1 and 2 create some
areas of positive low sensitivity and negative low sensitivity, which is a
mixed partition; for instance, Region 1 is positively sensitive to variables
such as consumption demand type and RFD, while Region 2 is positively
sensitive to some variables related to traffic and facility density. Region
Fig. 11. Variable interpretability results based on the PDP method.
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
15
3, on the other hand, represents a negatively high sensitivity area. The
results from GMM clustering can provide auxiliary enhancements; for
the overlapping region 1 between K-means clustering and GMM clustering, this area is most likely to attract street vendor crowds by
increasing consumption demand variables.
4. Discussions
4.1. Advantages and disadvantages of the time-space-population
screening method
This study proposed the time-population-space screening method
based on mobile signaling data, successfully identifying vendor spaces in
the main urban area of Wuhan. Compared to other methods for identifying vendor spaces, this approach has several advantages. First, it enables the identification of vendor spaces across the entire area during the
same time period. By analyzing the daily routines of different populations and applying a multi-layered screening process, the study
accurately identified the vendor population across the entire area and
localized it spatially. This achieves the identification of vendor spaces
over the same time period, providing a basis for urban vendor space
planning and management. Traditional field survey methods can only
identify individual vendor spaces (Martínez et al., 2018; Anaafo et al.,
2024). Even if the survey scope is expanded, it is difficult to cover the
entire vendor population, making it impossible to obtain an identification of vendor spaces within the same time period. Additionally, such
methods require significant survey effort and exhibit low identification
efficiency. Street view recognition methods can efficiently and quickly
identify vendor spaces, but due to the limitations of street view data
locations, they can only identify vendor spaces along major roads (Liu &
Liu, 2022), failing to cover the entire vendor population across the same
time period.
Second, this method eliminates the randomness in identifying
vendor spaces. The time-population-space screening method locks in a
uniform time period that encompasses the entire population, ensuring
that all vendor activities occur concurrently. Individual mobile signaling
is tracked, preventing the repeated counting of vendor populations,
which enhances the accuracy of space identification. In contrast, street
view recognition methods identify vendor spaces by analyzing images of
vendor populations, making it difficult to unify the timing of sample
data; the groups appearing in the photos are also random, leading to
incidental results.
Third, the identification method can be applied to other spatial
recognition tasks. The time-population-space screening method not only
identifies vendor populations but also detects the spatial distribution of
permanent residents, transient populations, formally employed individuals, and leisure populations across the entire area. The results
obtained retain the two aforementioned advantages, providing support
for related research.
However, the time-population-space screening method also has
certain limitations. First, mobile signaling data can only pinpoint the
locations of base stations, with data accuracy depending on the density
of base station distribution, resulting in vendor population locations that
cannot be accurately pinpointed to real-time coordinates. Second, the
user screening rules established in this study based on the usual
behavioral patterns of different populations may struggle to distinguish
Fig. 12. Spatial Distribution of SHAP Values for Various Influencing Factors.
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
16
specific behavioral groups (e.g., retirees, leisure populations), which
could lead to potential errors in identification. These errors can be
corrected through field surveys and research.
4.2. Spatial analysis exploration and policy recommendations based on
SHAP explanations
SHAP can address the ’black box’ problem of the XGBoost model by
quantifying the contribution of each feature to the model’s predictions.
If the Shapley value of a feature is positive, it means that the feature
positively influences the final prediction; conversely, a negative Shapley
value indicates a negative influence. SHAP explains its impact mechanisms through various visualizations, including bar charts, swarm plots,
scatter plots, and dependency plots. However, when studying spatial
issues, it has limitations. Since SHAP explanations remain at the
numerical level and do not integrate spatial aspects, they struggle to
reflect spatial heterogeneity and provide precise spatial information for
policy-making.
In this study, we applied K-Means, DBSCAN, and Agglomerative
Hierarchical Clustering to cluster the SHAP values of each feature in an
attempt to obtain sensitivity partitions. The results indicate that the
classification outcomes of K-Means are more ideal; based on the signs
and absolute values of the Shapley values, we successfully identified
four sensitivity zones: positive high sensitivity, positive low sensitivity,
negative low sensitivity, and negative high sensitivity. By coupling the
distribution of informal street vendor spaces with the results of the
sensitivity partitions (Fig. 16), we can offer important references for
policy formulation.
At the level of spatial structure management for informal street
vendors, in hotspot areas, since these hotspots are all located within the
positively sensitive zones (Fig. 16), it indicates that the concentration of
factors such as consumer demand, facility density, and transportation
accessibility promotes the formation of vendor hotspots. In these hotspot
areas, if vendor management policies remain unchanged, as urban
development improves, facility density and transportation accessibility
will inevitably increase, leading to a further concentration of informal
street vendor populations. Therefore, it is necessary to rely on large
residential communities, recreational facilities, commercial establishments, and dining facilities to reasonably establish relatively fixed
vendor aggregation spaces and capacity limits, thus avoiding the arbitrary expansion of vendor spaces and unrestricted growth of vendor
populations.
In cold spot areas, since these areas are all located within negatively
sensitive zones (Fig. 16), consumer demand, facility density, and
transportation accessibility exhibit an inhibiting effect on the
Fig. 13. Silhouette Coefficient Scores and Dendrogram of Hierarchical Clustering Algorithm.
Table 5
Parameter Sensitivity Analysis of the DBSCAN Algorithm.
eps min_samples Clusters Silhouette Score
0.3 3 6 0.61
0.3 5 4 0.75
0.3 7 3 0.79
0.5 3 4 0.41
0.5 5 3 0.46
0.5 7 Not enough —
0.7 3 7 0.32
0.7 5 3 0.37
0.7 7 2 0.44
1 3 14 0.08
1 5 4 0.16
1 7 3 0.26
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
17
concentration of vendor populations, indicating that it is difficult to
gather informal street vendors in these areas. Moreover, many of the
negatively high-sensitive zones are located around water bodies.
Wuhan, known as the City of Hundreds of Lakes, has large urban green
spaces and parks surrounding water bodies such as the Yangtze River,
Han River, and East Lake. These areas are vast and sparsely populated,
with well-established commercial infrastructure, making it difficult to
attract vendor concentrations. As the construction of park green spaces
continues to improve, the population of vendors will further decrease.
Therefore, in the cold spot areas and negatively sensitive zones, it is only
necessary to improve commercial facilities to meet residents’ living
needs, without the need to deliberately guide informal street vendor
populations to gather, thus avoiding resource wastage.
In the non-cold hotspot areas for informal street vendors, there are
also five positively sensitive zones located within non-cold hotspot areas
for vendors (highlighted in purple boxes in Fig. 16b), indicating that, at
this stage, the vendor population in these areas is not significant but has
the potential to become vendor-friendly spaces. Therefore, it is essential
to focus on managing the aforementioned positively sensitive zones,
controlling or reserving vendor aggregation spaces in conjunction with
regional functions. For instance, implementing compulsory measures to
control vendor population aggregation within administrative districts,
while encouraging vendor gatherings around schools, hospitals, sports
centers, commercial areas, and communities.
At the level of site selection for informal street vendor spaces, these
areas tend to be concentrated around recreational facilities, large
communities, commercial establishments, and regions with high intersection and entrance density. Therefore, priority should be given to
adding vendor zones in such areas. Regions densely populated with
dining facilities and transportation amenities (such as bus stops, subway
stations, and parking lots) are not suitable for the addition of vendor
booths. Furthermore, areas near administrative offices, parks, scenic
spots, and urban squares are also unsuitable for vendor operations;
therefore, control zones should be designated in these areas to prohibit
the establishment of vendor stalls.
In terms of internal spatial organization, to avoid disrupting spatial
order, it is necessary to anticipate the impacts that the introduction of
vendor zones may have on urban traffic and pedestrian flow. This can be
achieved by leaving open spaces, designating vendor points, and guiding
pedestrian flow through dedicated pathways, thereby reducing the risk
of overflow caused by vendors attempting to attract customers. Additionally, vendors should be categorized and zoned based on the types of
products or services they offer to minimize mutual interference and
enhance vendor complementarity and customer targeting. Vendor
spaces close to consumer-oriented facilities should pay attention to
spatial differences, establishing vendor zones in areas where commercial
facilities are insufficient or of lower quality, thereby forming a cluster in
conjunction with formal commercial establishments to meet the varying
needs of residents.
Fig. 14. Clustering partition results based on SHAP values (a: clustering spatial distribution; b: group feature profile; c: t-SNE visualization of clustering).
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
18
4.3. Research shortcomings and prospects
This paper focuses on hotspots of vendor space from a macro-spatial
distribution perspective and does not examine temporal variations in
vendor locations at different times. Future research could examine
within-day peak periods to study how vendors’ spatio-temporal choices
lead to changes in behavior and thereby inform more targeted management strategies. Our study is essentially a sampling survey: not
everyone uses the same mobile carrier, and some vendors may possess
two SIM cards from the same carrier, which could introduce
Fig. 15. Comparison of clustering partition results based on SHAP values (a: clustering spatial distribution; b: group feature profiles; c: t-SNE visualization
of clusters).
Fig. 16. Coupling map of vendor space cold and hot spot distribution and sensitivity partitions (a: Vendor space cold and hot spot distribution; b: Sensitivity partitions).
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
19
measurement error. When extending this approach to other Chinese
cities, researchers should first survey the primary mobile carriers used
by vendors (China Mobile, China Unicom, and China Telecom). When
applying the method to less-developed cities abroad, one should
consider data availability and access (e.g., whether mobile signaling is
widely deployed) and whether infrastructure-related variables need to
be adjusted.
The research perspective of this article is concentrated on the spatial
distribution and site selection at a macro scale. However, as vendor
spaces represent a flexible form of informal space, further research is
needed at the micro scale. In future studies, typical cases of vendor
spaces will be analyzed in depth to examine their spatial characteristics
and mechanisms of change.
Elshater and Abusaada (2024) conducted a study in Cairo, Egypt,
using spatial ethnography to investigate the place-management processes in areas where street food activities occur. Focus group interviews
were carried out with a random sample of street food vendors and
consumers to elicit vendor and consumer preferences. That work
confirmed the significant impact of street food on its surrounding
environment and emphasized the importance of people–place relationships. Our study also uses a survey-based approach, but focuses on the
quantitative analysis of space.
Using 208 questionnaires and 3 key interviews, this study examines
street food vendors’ site selection in Sunyani (Anaafo et al., 2024). The
findings show that vendors are largely women with low education and
skills, operating in unauthorized public spaces; their location choices are
driven by customer demand and factors such as proximity to the city
center, transport hubs, main roads, low cost and available space, as well
as time of day. The study recommends integrating vendors into urban
planning with supporting infrastructure, improving licensing and spatial
allocation efficiency, and strengthening monitoring and revenue mobilization to regularize activities and optimize urban spatial relations.
However, they did not address how infrastructure should be strengthened or which specific infrastructures are needed to support them. Our
study addresses this gap: we treat the issue as a planning problem, in line
with the author’s perspective.
Urban metabolism (UM) often overlooks informal resource flows.
This paper (Choueiri et al., 2025) defines informality and analyzes its
manifestations in water, energy, waste, food, and transport, proposing a
framework to incorporate informal processes into UM. It notes that
integrating formal and informal systems is complex and requires flexible
regulation; informal flows exacerbate inequalities in access, affordability, and gender, necessitating equity-oriented policies; and informal
actors should be included in planning. That study proposes a framework
for regulating the informal economy, and our research responds to this
measure—an extension that can help achieve more equitable, efficient
resource governance and sustainable urban development.
The informal economy plays a significant role in employment in Cali.
Based on two surveys of 637 and 300 participants (Martinez &
Rivera-Acevedo, 2018), the study finds that although street vendors
work in unregulated, low-tax activities and receive government benefits,
most are excluded from the formal banking system and therefore rely on
payday loans with very high interest rates. These short-term loans
consume a large share of income and entrench long-term indebtedness,
posing a major barrier to improving livelihoods; daily cash flows mask
the high opportunity costs and long-term deficits of such borrowing. The
study recommends using impact investments/impact bonds, blockchain
and similar technologies to reduce transaction costs and promote
financial formalization, prioritizing regulated financial channels as an
alternative to simple evictions and spatial control measures. In our
research, although we include spatial regulation in our policy recommendations, we do not want this to legitimize harsh enforcement. To
prevent vendors from being marginalized and stigmatized, we also
advocate a mix of measures—such as financial investment and participatory governance mechanisms—to enhance legitimacy.
The normative significance of delineating vendor sensitive areas lies
in: 1. identifying the most effective measures to attract or deter vendor
clustering in specific regions; 2. recognizing potential vendor gathering
spaces to guide government decision-making and public participation.
For instance, the public can refer to certain potential high-sensitivity
areas where the effects of vendor activities may be similar to those in
other regions. This may prevent excessive concentration in specific
areas, and the government can encourage vendor activities in these
potential locations. Although this approach may increase the rationale
for law enforcement, it can be balanced through guidance and public
consultation.
Initially, the government’s planning can adopt a more encouraging
stance rather than a one-size-fits-all approach, aiming to avoid stigmatizing or spatially marginalizing informal actors as much as possible. The
geographic transferability of this method is promising, as mobile signal
bases are now widespread in urban areas, and other data are relatively
easy to obtain. If combined with participatory or survey data, the results
will likely be more accurate. In the future, a participatory mechanism
could be introduced, such as establishing vendor associations to provide
practical recommendations and allow for timely adjustments based on
feedback from the results.
5. Conclusions
This study utilizes mobile signaling data to construct a time-spacepopulation screening method to identify the informal street vendor
spaces across the entire urban area. The XGBoost and SHAP analysis are
employed to examine the influencing mechanisms of these vendor
spaces. Finally, by clustering the SHAP values of various factors, we
identify sensitivity zones for informal street vendor spaces and propose
suggestions for site selection and management. The research findings
indicate:
(1) The main urban area of Wuhan has formed two major clusters and
four minor clusters of vendor spaces, mainly adjacent to large
communities, schools, sports centers, commercial districts, and
hospitals.
(2) Among the factors influencing vendor clustering, those related to
consumer demand are the most important, followed by facility
density factors, and finally traffic environment factors.
(3) In terms of driving directions, factors such as RFD (Recreational
facilities density), RPD (Residential population density), FA
(Floor area), IoD (Inlet and outlet density), InD (Intersection
density), and TRD (Trunk road density) are positively correlated
with vendor clustering, while CaFD (Catering facilities density),
TFD (Traffic facilities density) are negatively correlated. CoFD
(Commercial facility density), SAD (Secondary artery density),
BFD (Business office facilities density), PFD (Public service facilities density), and OSD (Open space density) have both inhibiting and promoting effects on vendor clustering.
(4) The promoting or inhibiting effects of each factor on vendor
clustering exhibit spatial heterogeneity and may vary across
different sensitivity zones.
(5) Hotspot/coldspot areas of vendor spaces are all located within
positively/negatively sensitive zones, indicating a high degree of
coupling between the two.
(6) This study provides the government with practical and feasible
recommendations for managing vendor spaces by delineating
sensitive areas to identify regions where efforts to attract and
deter vendors would be most effective. To support vendors, it is
advisable to enhance infrastructure with the highest SHAP mean
values in positively sensitive areas, which represents a potential
form of support. Additionally, the design of shared spaces, merchant corridors, or micro-infrastructures could be considered.
The use of monthly data in this study may overlook certain extreme
weather events and seasonal fluctuations, and there are limitations in
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
20
the clustering algorithms and data that may hinder capturing the fluidity
of the informal economy. In the future, longitudinal comparisons could
be conducted in other cities, such as Shenzhen and Shanghai.
Data availability
We are grateful to all the sites that provide the data, including China
Unicom Subscriber Data, National Geographic Information Public Service Platform (https://ww w.tianditu.gov.cn), Gaode Open Platform
(https://lbs.amap.com/).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Heng Zhou: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Kui Yang: Writing – review & editing,
Methodology, Investigation. Jingnan Huang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources. Jun Huang: Visualization, Investigation.
Yixuan Gao: Formal analysis. Jinting Zhang: Writing – review &
editing, Software. Yong Chen: Project administration. Mengya Yu:
Formal analysis.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by Social Science Research Project of Education Department of Hubei Province under Grants 2023–6–717 and
2023–6–718, Construction Science and Technology Planning Project of
Hubei Province under Grants [2022] 2198–122 and [2022] 2198–1.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.scs.2025.106858.
References
Adama, O. (2020). Abuja is not for the poor: Street vending and the politics of public
space. Geoforum; journal of physical, human, and regional geosciences, 109, 14–23.
Anaafo, D., Nutsugbodo, R. Y., Agyepong, E., Anane, G. K., Mensah, B. A., & Bata, P. D.
(2024). Place making decisions among informal street food vendors in Sunyani,
Ghana. Cities (London, England), 154.
Bandauko, E., & Arku, G. (2024). It is no longer the sunshine city, it is now a dump site
city”: Discursive construction of urban space and street trading in Harare,
Zimbabwe. Cities, 155.
Boonjubun, C. (2017). Conflicts over streets: The eviction of Bangkok street vendors.
Cities (London, England), 70, 22–31.
Chen, Y., Yang, J., Yu, W., Ren, J., Xiao, X., & Xia, J. C. (2023). Relationship between
urban spatial form and seasonal land surface temperature under different grid scales.
Sustainable Cities and Society, 89, Article 104374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scs.2022.104374
Choueiri, Y., Perrotti, D., & Acevedo-De-los-Ríos, A. (2025). Characterizing informality in
urban resource management: Towards an integrated framework of urban
metabolism and informal flows. Land Use Policy, 151, Article 107472. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2025.107472
Elshater, A., & Abusaada, H. (2024). Proactive insights into place management:
Spatiotemporal effects of street food activities in public spaces. Journal of Place
Management and Development, 17, 442–463. https://doi.org/10.1108/JPMD-10-
2023-0103
Farinmade, A., Soyinka, O., & Siu, K. W. M. (2018). Assessing the effect of urban informal
economic activity on the quality of the built environment for sustainable urban
development in Lagos, Nigeria. Sustainable Cities and Society, 41, 13–21.
Flock, R., & Breitung, W. (2015). Migrant street vendors in urban China and the social
production of public space. Population, Space and Place,, 22, 158–169.
Gao, J., Qu, L., & Wu, W. (2025). Spatial-temporal variation of surface temperature and
cold island network construction in the Yangtze River delta urban agglomeration:
Perspectives from current and future scenarios. Sustainable Cities and Society, 126,
Article 106396. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2025.106396
Huang, G., Xue, D., & Wang, Y. (2019). Governmentality and spatial strategies: Towards
formalization of street vendors in Guangzhou, China. International Journal of Urban
and Regional Research, 43, 442–459.
Kamete, A. Y. (2018). Pernicious assimilation: Reframing the integration of the urban
informal economy in Southern Africa. Urban Geography, 39, 167–189.
Kazembe, L. N., Nickanor, N., & Crush, J. (2019). Informalized containment: Food
markets and the governance of the informal food sector in Windhoek, Namibia.
Environment and Urbanization, 31, 461–480.
Kim, Y., & Kim, Y. (2023). Global regionalization of heat environment quality perception
based on K-means clustering and Google trends data. Sustainable Cities and Society,
96, Article 104710. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2023.104710
Lemessa, S. D., Watabaji, M. D., Yismaw, M. A., & Tadesse, A. B. (2021). Evening street
vending and the tragic living conditions of vendors: The case of eastern Ethiopia
region. Cities (London, England), 108.
Li, B., Peng, Y., He, H., Wang, M., & Feng, T. (2021). Built environment and early
infection of COVID-19 in urban districts: A case study of Huangzhou. Sustainable
Cities and Society, 66, Article 102685. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2020.102685
Li, C., Huang, Y., Shen, Y., & Xu, L. (2022). Spatiotemporal patterns and mechanisms of
street vending from the social sensing perspective: A comparison between lawenforcement reported and residents complain events. Cities (London, England), 124.
Li, J., Ren, L., Hu, T., & Wang, F. (2018). A city’s “urban crack” at 4 a.m.: A case study of
morning market vendors in Beijing’s Longfu Temple area. Habitat International, 71,
14–21.
Linares, L. A. (2018). The paradoxes of informalizing street trade in the Latin American
city. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 38, 651–672.
Lindell, I. (2019). Introduction: Re-spatialising urban informality: Reconsidering the
spatial politics of street work in the global South. International Development Planning
Review, 41, 3–21.
Liu, Y., & Liu, Y. (2022). Detecting the city-scale spatial pattern of the urban informal
sector by using the street view images: A street vendor massive investigation case.
Cities (London, England), 131.
Maneepong, C., & Walsh, J. C. (2013). A new generation of Bangkok Street vendors:
Economic crisis as opportunity and threat. Cities (London, England), 34, 37–43.
MART´INEZ, L., Short, J. R., & Estrada, D. (2017). The urban informal economy: Street
vendors in Cali. Colombia. Cities, 66, 34–43.
Martinez, L., & Rivera-Acevedo, J. D. (2018). Debt portfolios of the poor: The case of
street vendors in Cali. Colombia. Sustainable Cities and Society, 41, 120–125. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2018.04.037
Martínez, L., Short, J. R., & Estrada, D. (2018). The diversity of the street vending: A case
study of street vending in Cali. Cities (London, England), 79, 18–25.
Ojeda, L., & Pino, A. (2019). Spatiality of street vendors and sociospatial disputes over
public space: The case of Valparaíso, Chile. Cities (London, England), 95.
Onodugo, V. A., Ezeadichie, N. H., Onwuneme, C. A., & Anosike, A. E. (2016). The
dilemma of managing the challenges of street vending in public spaces: The case of
Enugu City, Nigeria. Cities, 59, 95–101.
Pel´
aez-Higuera, J., Calderon-Hern ´ ´
andez, G., & Serna-Gomez, ´ H.-M. (2023). Social,
commercial and economic diversity. Poverty and expectations among street vendors
in Florencia, Caqueta, ´ Colombia. Cities (London, England), 140.
Recchi, S. (2020). Informal street vending: A comparative literature review. International
Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 41, 805–825.
Roy, A. (2005). Urban informality: Toward an epistemology of planning. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 71, 147–158. https://doi.org/10.1080/
01944360508976689
Sun, Z., Scott, I., Bell, S., Yang, Y., & Yang, Z. (2022). Exploring dynamic street vendors
and pedestrians through the lens of static spatial configuration in Yuncheng, China.
Remote Sensing, 14.
Thanh, P. T., & Duong, P. B. (2022). The COVID-19 pandemic and the livelihood of a
vulnerable population: Evidence from women street vendors in urban Vietnam. Cities
(London, England), 130.
Thomas Devlin, R. (2018). Global Best practice or regulating fiction? Street vending, zero
tolerance and conflicts over public space in New York, 1980–2000. International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 42, 517–532.
Wang, C., Yang, K., Yang, W., Li, R., Qiang, H., Lu, B., Su, B., & Yang, Z. (2024).
Assessment of the urban habitat quality service functions and their drivers based on
the fusion module of graph attention network and residual network. International
Journal of Digital Earth, 17, Article 2306310. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17538947.2024.2306310
Widjajanti, R. (2016). The space utilization by street vendors based on the location
characteristics in the education area of Tembalang, Semarang. Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 227, 186–193.
Yang, K., Zhang, J., Cui, D., Ma, Y., Ye, Y., He, X., Yang, Z., Cheng, M., & Zhang, Y.
(2025). Multi-scale study of the synergy between human activities and climate
change on urban heat islands in China. Sustainable Cities and Society, 125.
Yang, K., Zhou, P., Wu, J., Yao, Q., Yang, Z., Wang, X., & Wen, Y. (2024). Carbon stock
inversion study of a carbon peaking pilot urban combining machine learning and
Landsat images. Ecological Indicators, 159, Article 111657. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ecolind.2024.111657
Yi, S., Li, X., Wang, R., Guo, Z., Dong, X., Liu, Y., & Xu, Q. (2024). Interpretable spatial
machine learning insights into urban sanitation challenges: A case study of human
feces distribution in San Francisco. Sustainable Cities and Society, 113.
Zhang, J., Yang, K., Wu, J., Duan, Y., Ma, Y., Ren, J., & Yang, Z. (2024). Scenario
simulation of carbon balance in carbon peak pilot cities under the background of the
“dual carbon” goals. Sustainable Cities and Society, 116, Article 105910. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scs.2024.105910
Zhao, X., Huang, H., Lin, G., & Lu, Y. (2025). Exploring temporal and spatial patterns and
nonlinear driving mechanism of park perceptions: A multi-source big data study.
Sustainable Cities and Society, 119, Article 106083. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scs.2024.106083
H. Zhou et al. Sustainable Cities and Society 133 (2025) 106858
21